@document.meta
title: resource_demand
description: 
categories: 
created: 2023-03-21
updated: 2023-03-24
version: 1.0.0
@end

* Knowledge quiz
  ~ transparent solar panels
  ~ covering of all transparent surfaces with solar panels
  ~ fuel crops, e.g. sugar cane can be fermented into ethanol
  ~ sugar cane can be grown sustainably, as the carbon dioxide taken in
    to grow the plant offsets the carbon released when burned. The crops
    can be regrown within a human's life
  ~ areal extend, duration, magnitude, speed of onset, predictability
  ~ the descriptors are not specific to any event, making it difficult to
    compare them, e.g. magnitude cannot be compared between different 
    events as it is measured differently for each

* Resource demand

$ Land conversion
  any change from natural ecosystems to an alternative use. e.g. a rainforest
  into a cattle farm

  The terrestrial biosphere sequesters around 15% of fossil fuel CO2 emissions
  per year, slowing the impact of global warming. However, with growing demand
  for food, fuel, etc, regional trends of land conversion have occurred.

** Causes of deforestation
   - Slash and burn agriculture, e.g. Brazil
   - Tropical hardwood exportation, e.g. Cambodian imports into China
   - Rare mineral extraction, e.g. Brazil
   - Clearing space for oil collection, e.g. Athabasca / Siberia
   - Transport

** Impacts of deforestation
   - Loss of biodiversity from destruction of ecosystems
   - Release of CO2 from slash and burn agriculture
   - Reduced carbon dioxide sequestration
   - Increased flood risk due to decreased interception
   - increased soil erosion due to lack of protection from trees, leading to
     more sediment being transported into rivers
   - Increased local aridity from loss of ecosystems

** Describe the regional trends of forest change between 1990-2015
   The general pattern shows that countries in the southern hemisphere have
   higher net forest loss, such as Brazil or Indonesia, with >500,000 ha net
   less of forest per year, compared to France, which has a net gain of 
   50,000 - 250,000 ha, a difference of 750,000. One exception is Chile, the
   only country which has a net gain in the southern hemisphere, with a net 
   gain of 250,000 - 500,000 ha of forest.


** Afforestation and reforestation
   Afforestation and reforestation is beneficial for CO2 sequestration but can
   also cause problems. Non indigenous trees often store less CO2, use up more
   water and are prone to disease. This can be seen in China’s Three-North
   Shelterbelt which aimed to reduce desertification. This project included
   planting a 4,500km green wall of trees.

  Grassland conversion
   Temperate (e.g. north american prairies) have fertile soils, making them
   important stores of carbon. However, they have suffered degradation due to
   usage for agriculture. Tropical (e.g. serengeti) have infertile soil, but
   have still suffered from land conversion due to intensive animal farming,
   ploughing and changes in farming styles from nomadic to sedentary

*** Ocean acidification
    - The decrease of pH in oceans, damaging coral reefs
    - Up to the 19th century, ocean water pH was around 8.2, dropping to 8.1 
      by 2015. A level below 7.8 will prevent coral from growing.
    - This acidification increases the risk of marine ecosystems reaching a 
      critical threshold of permanent damage
    - The arctic ocean will be severely affected, as the coral that grows 
      there is vulnerable to changes in temperature of pH
    - Acidification leads to dissolving of carbonate shells, weakening them 
      and allowing attack from bio-erosion by molluscs, worms and sponges
    - biodiversity is affected, leading to a downturn in fishing for local
      industries

*** Climate change
    - In 2015, global temperatures reached 1o C above pre-industrial levels
    - This led to severe droughts in Africa, India and Pakistan, and flooding
      in Europa and the USA
    - Climate change may increase the frequency of drought due to shifting
      climate belts
    - Northern latitudes will experience the most changes
    - Due to shifts in the ITCZ, seasonal variations in rainfall in the Amazon
      rainforest have increased, threatening São paulo, which experienced a
      water shortage

* (x) TODO
  - (x) Read {https://www.mining-technology.com/features/mining-and-deforestation-the-unheeded-industry-challenge/}[article on mining and deforestation]
  - (x) Homework due 2023-03-23
  -- (x) Finish last 3 slides on powerpoint
  - ( ) research great green wall in the Sahel
